The Delicious, No-Oven Blueberry Muffin Recipe That Only Take 3 Minutes (VIDEO)
Posted: 06/20/2014 9:56 am EDT Updated: 06/20/2014 1:59 pm EDT Print Article

Share
5428
Tweet
7
366
Email
662
Share on Google+
Fresh, piping hot blueberry muffins shouldn't only be reserved for lazy Sundays. Beth Moncel, author of Budget Bytes, has a clever way to make easy, delicious breakfast muffins in only three minutes.

The trick? Rather than using an oven, Moncel mixes all of her ingredients in a ceramic mug and pops it into a microwave. The result is a single-serve Blueberry Mug Muffin you eat with a spoon. "It's an interesting cross between blueberry pancakes and a muffin," the food blogger tells #OWNSHOW in the above video.

Moncel's Blueberry Mug Muffin recipe:

Ingredients

¼ cup flour
1 Tbsp brown sugar
¼ tsp baking powder
? tsp salt
pinch cinnamon
½ Tbsp butter
2 Tbsp milk
1-2 Tbsp frozen blueberries
Instructions
1. In a microwave-safe mug, stir together the flour, brown sugar, baking powder, salt, and cinnamon until well mixed.
2. Add the butter to the mug and use your fingers to rub or smoosh them together until no large chunks of butter remain and the mixture looks like damp sand.
3. Stir the milk into the butter/flour mixture. It should now resemble a thick muffin batter. If it’s too dry, add a splash more milk. Sprinkle blueberries over top and push them down into the batter. Microwave on high for approximately 90 seconds.

If you're not craving mug muffins yet, the topping ideas Moncel suggests will change that fast.

"I like to do a little drizzle of maple syrup, that makes it extra pancake-like," she says. "You can do honey, if you like. And sometimes, I even drop a little spoonful of peanut butter down into the batter before I microwave it, and that makes an extra gooey, peanut center and kind of gives that peanut butter and jelly effect with the blueberries."

Find the full recipe and instructions for Moncel's Blueberry Mug Muffin on BudgetBytes.com. Watch more #OWNSHOW videos on Oprah.com.
