Map Lab
Get to Know a Projection: The Space-Oblique Mercator
BY NICK STOCKTON   06.20.14  |   12:51 PM  |   PERMALINK

Without 
John Snyder, LandSat would just make pretty pictures instead of beautiful maps.  NASA

For his 50th birthday, 
John Parr Snyder’s wife bought him a special gift: a ticket to “The Changing World of Geodetic Science,” a 
cartography convention in Columbus, Ohio. 
Geodesy, an esoteric branch of geography studying the shape of the earth, had been one of Snyder’s lifelong hobbies. 
As a keynote, the 1976 conference featured a speech from 
Alden Partridge Colvocoresses, decorated 
World War II hero and 
head of the USGS’s national mapping program.

More Projections:

Dymaxion vs. Cahill
Raisz's Armadillo
Lambert Conformal Conic
Colvocoresses was responsible for turning imagery from LandSat-1, launched in 1972, into high resolution maps. 
However, he had a problem: LandSat was taking amazing photographs, but nobody could figure out how to turn those photographs into maps. 
The math behind a projection that accounted for both the 
satellite’s and 
Earth’s respective movements was too complicated, so he was turning to the civilian audience of professional and amateur cartographers for help.
Snyder went home inspired. 
He had a day job, but in less than 
four months, working alone, at night, without pay, and using a calculator that stored his work on magnetic tapes, he solved the problem of making maps from space.

When NASA launched the 
LandSat program (originally called the 
Earth Resources Technology Satellite), making maps wasn’t a priority. 
But many engineers soon saw how valuable it would be to assign geographic coordinates to high-resolution images. 
Colvocoresses, no mapping slouch, came up with a 
theoretical solution in 1973, which he called the 
Space-Oblique Mercator projection.

The original LandSat-1
The original LandSat-1  NASA
It was based on 
Geraldus Mercator’s 1569 projection, because 
it preserved the angles of Earth’s surface features in relation to one another (a property called 
conformality). 
Unlike the original Mercator, which used the equator as a line of zero distortion, 
Colvocoresses decided that 
the line of zero distortion would be the path along the earth’s surface directly below LandSat’s camera. 
Because LandSat’s camera only captured a 
100-nautical-mile-wide swath, distortion would be minimal.
Mapping from space isn’t as easy as matching up photo features to the 
cartesian graticule. 
Even though the images were two-dimensional, 
they were of a curved surface, which means they needed to be 
geometrically adjusted—projected—as flat areas.

Colvocoresses turned the 
Space-Oblique Marcator’s basic structure over to his team of geographers. 
”They didn’t think it would be a big problem to project the photos and make them into maps,” said 
John Hessler, a geographer at the Library of Congress.


Snyder’s Space-Oblique Projection. 
Notice the sinewave-like path of tangency. 
Distortion within 100 nautical miles of this line is less than 
.01 percent. USGS

Thing is, there are no small problems in space, and LandSat’s mappers had four. 

Projections are essentially views of the Earth from imaginary, elevated viewpoints, and people have been making them for 2,000 years.
 However, nobody had ever considered that if they were going to actually make a map from an 
actual elevated viewpoint, they’d have to account not only for the 
platform moving (in orbit),
 but also the earth rotating below. 

But the Earth doesn’t just spin, 
it has a little bit of a wobble, too. 

And then there’s gravity, which doesn’t pull uniformly across the earth’s surface, but is stronger is some places, weaker in others 
(because the Earth is denser in some areas and less dense in others).
 
All these things affect the 
satellite’s position and 
altitude relative to the Earth, and all of them need to be considered before you make a map from a satellite.

When years went by without a solution to these problems, 


Colvocoresses turned to outside help, including 
John L. Junkins, an engineer at Texas A&M. 
Junkins specialized in 
telemetry—tracking moving objects—and was a good bet for figuring out how all those motions could fit into a mappable geometric equation.

But Colvocoresses was a former Army strategist (who helped prep for D-Day), and he knew that a battle this tough should be fought on multiple fronts. 
He put his plea to the masses, and in 
1976, at Ohio State University, at the Fawcett Center for Tomorrow, at the geodetic conference, that plea reached the ears of lifelong map addict 
John Snyder.

Snyder took a different tack than Junkins and the USGS scientists. 
They were trying to create a comprehensive framework using Newtonian physics that could be used to 
predict the ground track of any orbiting body onto Earth. 
Snyder didn’t care about trying to predict all the motions, he was only concerned with the ones that mattered. 
“His equations didn’t tell you anything about how the satellite was moving,” said Hessler. 
“He just looked at the 
central path of the satellite and calculated how it would 
relate to lines of latitude and longitude.”

Sketches and notes on various projection techniques, from 
Snyder's notebook when he was 16 years old.
Sketches and notes on various projection techniques, from 
Snyder’s notebook when he was 16 years old.  John Hessler/Library of Congress
Hessler, the Library of Congress geographer, calls
 Snyder a cartographic prodigy. 
His high school notebooks are full of drawings, notes, and equations all about map projections. 
Though he went to school for, and worked most of his adult life as, a chemical engineer, he wrote several books about mapping. 
Shortly before the Ohio convention, he had bought himself a 
TI-59 programmable calculator. 
(Snyder had quit trying to create map equations years before, because the equations got too difficult for him to do on paper.)

In his later years, he became a master of 
herding geographic distortion, so he could 
preserve the shapes and sizes of the features that he was wanted in focus.
 One example of this is the 
GS50, the only projection where you can see all 50 states—including Alaska and Hawai’i—on a single, seamless map with minimal distortion. 
A few years before he died in 1997, 
he published what many consider to be the bible of map projections: 
a surprisingly readable volume called 
Flattening the Earth.

Snyder was too anxious to send his calculations directly to the USGS, so he asked 
Waldo Tobler, a geographer at the University of California in Santa Barbara, to review them first. 
Tobler saw that they would work, and forwarded them along to the 
Colvocoresses. 
The moment he saw it, the USGS mapper knew that Snyder’s work was the key to making 
Space-Oblique Mercator work. 
He asked if he wanted to move from New Jersey to Virginia, and become a professional cartographer with the USGS. 
And John Parr Snyder, who had been obsessed with maps since he was a boy, accepted without hesitation.





