

Magento Mobile?

How It Works
Enable the Mobile Tab in your Admin Panel.
Download the free extension from Magento Connect.
* Enterprise and Professional Editions 1.10 and higher and Community Edition 1.5 and higher already have this built in.

Purchase an application key (license) and submit your app to Magento using the Admin Panel in your Magento installation.
Enroll into the iOS Developer Program: http://developer.apple.com/programs/ios/

(if you do not yet have an account).
Provide Magento with your iOS account username and password by emailing us at mobileinfo@magento.com with a subject line of "iOS Developer Account".
Magento completes the submission process to the respective marketplaces and maintains code for a low annual fee.

-----------------------------
Something for Nothing
and
Everything for Free
-------------------

Plans and Pricing
Platform
Annual Fee
Qty
$699.00 per year	

$699.00 per year	

$699.00 per year

----------------

Features
Integration with Magento eCommerce

Seamless integration with your current product catalog.
One admin panel for multiple devices.
Support for a wide range of checkout capabilities.
Native application for iPhone, iPad and Android mobile devices.
The Magento Mobile Admin Panel

Real-time customization including updates for promotions and merchandising
Installs directly into your existing Magento Admin panel
Multiple devices supported from one admin panel
Seamless integration with your existing catalog, CMS and store configurations
Cohesive content and order management capability across all online stores
Manage multiple store views from a single centralized interface
Integrate new mobile stores with an existing Magento store
Customize for distinct mobile use
Application submission process managed within the admin panel
Pre-integrated with Urban Airship airmail and push notification services (iPhone only)
Pre-integrated with Flurry Analytics tools to gain insight on application usage by end customer (iPhone only)
OS support – Support iOS 3.x version and Android 2.x version and above
Native iPhone App

Intuitive UI takes advantage of the device touch screen
Appealing user experience with optimized design utilizing native device features
Built to Perform

Image resizing for product list and category icons based on device supported resolution
Intuitive navigation of catalogs and menus
Enhanced caching scheme
Account Management Integration

Login
Address Book
New Account Registration
Purchase History
Real Time Product-Catalog Integration

Product images, titles and descriptions
Inventory / stock levels
Tell a friend
Layered navigation
Pricing (current, discounts, +/- tax amounts, etc.)
Reviews & ratings
Product Search
Simple & Configurable Products
Intuitive Application Interface

Consistency for users between eCommerce site and mobile application
Easy customization and branding of your mobile store
Robust shopping features including easy search and navigation capabilities
Control over the way content and images are displayed
Merchandising Tools

Implement themes and banners; promote sales and special offers
Display categories and sub-categories of products
Reviews and ratings
In-stock or out-of-stock notice
Checkout integration and payment applications

Integrated with best-of-breed payment applications including PayPal Mobile Checkout
Optional integration with your existing checkout including Authorize.net, Cybersource and others
International Support

Support for Spanish, French, German, Italian, Dutch and Japanese with more language/currency support to come
Magento Mobile Source Code

The Magento Mobile source code allows you to customize and create your own extensions, and to develop a high performing mobile app with a seamless user experience.
Customize the app with unique features to meet customer requirements
Easily create new extensions
Simple application architecture based on Magento core and extension modules
Objective C source code
Annual license on a per-customer and per-mobile-application basis
Please click here to contact a Magento Territory Manager for more information on Magento Mobile source code. Mobile applications created using the source code are submitted to the Apple App Store and supported by the developer.

----------------------------------
