Plot[edit]


Act I[edit]
The citizens of Oz celebrate the death of the Wicked Witch of the West as Glinda arrives. 
She recalls that the green-skinned Elphaba, the "Wicked" Witch, was conceived during an affair between the 
Munchkin Governor's wife and a mysterious stranger with a bottle of green elixir. 
Everyone was repulsed by Elphaba, and so Glinda asks the 
Ozians to empathize ("No One Mourns the Wicked") with her side of the story. 
The remainder of the plot forms an extended flashback of the lives of 
Glinda and Elphaba.
The pair meet at 
Shiz University ("Dear Old Shiz"). 
Elphaba is reviled by all the students, including the popular but shallow Galinda. 
Elphaba was sent to Shiz to take care of her wheelchair-bound younger sister 
Nessarose. 
Despite Elphaba and Galinda's instant loathing, 
Madame Morrible, 
Shiz's headmistress, makes them roommates. 
Elphaba displays an innate magical talent, and Morrible notes that her talents may be of use to the Wizard of Oz. 
Elphaba dreams of what she and the Wizard could accomplish together ("The Wizard and I"). 
Galinda and Elphaba later write home about their unfortunate room-mate assignments 
("What is this Feeling?").
 Doctor Dillamond, 
Shiz's only Animal professor, confides in Elphaba that something is causing the Animals of Oz to lose their powers of speech ("Something Bad").


A friendship develops between Galinda and Elphaba
Fiyero, a Winkie prince, then arrives at Shiz and impresses his carefree living on the students ("Dancing Through Life"). 
Besotted with Galinda, a Munchkin named 
Boq asks her to accompany him to a party, but having fallen for 
Fiyero, Galinda asks him to invite 
Nessarose instead. Nessarose, not realizing Galinda's real motives, is delighted, and tells Elphaba what happened. 
Galinda discovers a black pointed hat and gives it to Elphaba as a mock present. 
Elphaba, remembering how happy Galinda had made Nessarose 
(and not knowing she had ulterior motives), asks 
Madame Morrible to reconsider Galinda's previous exclusion from her 
Sorcery Seminar. 
When Elphaba arrives at the party wearing the hat, she is ridiculed. 
Feeling guilty, Galinda dances with her, marking the start of their friendship.
Elphaba's father hates her, Elphaba reveals, because her pregnant mother ate milk-flowers to prevent her second child from being born green-skinned. 
The milk-flowers instead caused Nessarose to be born prematurely, leaving her crippled while her mother died in childbirth. 
A sympathetic Galinda gives Elphaba a personality makeover ("Popular").
The next day, Doctor Dillamond is arrested. 
His replacement arrives with a lion cub as the subject of an experiment, kept in a cage that causes Animals in it to lose their power of speech. 
Outraged, 
Elphaba and Fiyero set the cub free. 
Elphaba begins to discover romantic feelings towards Fiyero, but says that she "wasn't born" to be loved ("I'm Not that Girl"). 
Madame Morrible finds her, announcing that Elphaba has been granted an audience with the Wizard in the Emerald City.
Galinda, 
Fiyero, 
Nessarose and 
Boq see 
Elphaba off, all happy for her accomplishment. 
In an attempt to impress Fiyero, Galinda announces she will change her name to "Glinda" in honor of Doctor Dillamond, who had mispronounced her name that way. 
Fiyero fails to notice and leaves. 
Feeling bad for Glinda, 
Elphaba invites her along to see the Wizard.
After a day of bonding and sightseeing in the Emerald City ("One Short Day"), 
Elphaba and Glinda meet the Wizard. 
Eschewing the special effects he employs for the benefit of most visitors, he invites Elphaba to join him ("A Sentimental Man"). 
The Wizard asks Elphaba to perform a levitation spell on his monkey servant, 
Chistery, using the 
Grimmerie, an ancient book of spells. 
Elphaba demonstrates an intrinsic understanding of the lost language in the book, and gives 
Chistery wings. 
When Elphaba sees he seems to be in pain and demands they show her how to reverse the spell, 
Morrible tells her that spells are irreversible. 
The Wizard then reveals a 
cage full of winged monkeys, proving the extent of Elphaba's powers. 
He says they will make perfect spies. 
Elphaba now realizes 
he was the one who robbed the animals of their speech and 
created the cages. 
The Wizard wants Elphaba to join him in 
"creating a really good enemy" for the Ozians, using her powers.

Defying Gravity
MENU0:00
The bridge section of "Defying Gravity", the Act I finale
Problems playing this file? See media help.

Elphaba takes the Grimmerie and runs away with Glinda. 
Realizing that she knows too much about his plans, the Wizard sends 
Morrible and his guards after Elphaba and Glinda. 
They hear 
Morrible warning all of Oz of this "Wicked Witch" and 
her horrible deed to the innocent monkeys. 
Elphaba and Glinda now must choose which path their lives will take. 
Ultimately, Glinda chooses to 
take a life living with the Wizard and becoming a public figure within Oz. 
Elphaba, however, decides to use her newly learned powers to 
stand against the Wizard and do what she believes is right. 
Elphaba accepts her friend's choice and they wish each other the best. 
Elphaba uses the Grimmerie to place a 
levitation spell on a broom and flies away from the palace guards when they break into the attic 
she and Glinda had barricaded themselves in ("Defying Gravity"). 
This public act of defiance convinces the Ozians that she is truly wicked.



Act II[edit]


Julia Murney as Elphaba in the national tour of Wicked, 2006.

A few months later Elphaba's opposition of the Wizard's regime has earned her the title "The Wicked Witch of the West" (reprise of "No One Mourns the Wicked"). 
Informing him that Elphaba does not want to be found, Glinda puts on a happy front despite 
Fiyero's waning affections ("Thank Goodness").
Meanwhile, Elphaba arrives at her old home, the 
Governor's residence in Munchkinland, seeking refuge. 
Nessarose, now the Governor, criticizes Elphaba for not using her powers to help her. 
Guilty, Elphaba enchants Nessarose's shoes, turning them into the ruby slippers and enabling her to walk. 
Boq bemoans that Nessarose is as "wicked" as Elphaba for stripping the Munchkins of their rights and prohibiting them from leaving Munchkinland. 
Nessarose explains that she did this to keep 
Boq with her, but is sure that he will stay with her of his own accord now that she is no longer crippled. 
However, Boq insists that he should now be free to pursue Glinda instead. 
Hurt and angry, Nessarose attempts to cast a spell from the Grimmerie to make Boq fall in love with her. 
However, the spell backfires, causing Boq to literally lose his heart. 
While Elphaba attempts to save him, Nessarose reflects on how being "alone and loveless" has led to her wicked actions, and fears that she deserves her new title 
("The Wicked Witch of the East"). 
Elphaba says that nothing will ever be enough for her sister and leaves her for good, despite 
Nessarose's frantic pleas for her to stay. 
When Boq wakes up, he is horrified to discover that Elphaba has transformed him into a Tin Man, so he could live without a heart, and 
Nessarose lays the entire blame on her sister while 
Boq runs away in horror.

As Long as You're Mine
MENU0:00
The introduction and first two lines of "As Long as You're Mine"
Problems playing this file? See media help.

Returning to the Wizard's palace, Elphaba tries to free the remaining winged monkeys. 
The Wizard attempts to regain her favor by agreeing to set them free, recounting how the Ozians hailed him as the Wonderful Wizard when he first came to Oz. 
He says that she could be hailed by everyone if she joins him ("Wonderful"). 
Elphaba rejects his offer upon discovering the 
now-speechless Doctor Dillamond amongst the monkeys. 
While attempting to escape, she bumps into 
Fiyero, who runs away with her, confirming that he loves her in return. 
Glinda sees this and is crestfallen that she has been betrayed by those closest to her (reprise of "I'm Not that Girl"). 
When Glinda states that 
Elphaba can be lured by spreading a rumor that Nessarose is in danger, 
Madame Morrible creates a cyclone that brings Dorothy's house to Oz and crushes Nessarose to death. 
During this, 
Fiyero and Elphaba express their love ("As Long as You're Mine"), but Elphaba senses that her sister is in danger. 
Before she rushes to help, Fiyero explains to Elphaba that his family has an empty castle far away. 
He promises her she can hide there and that he will go to join her. 
She flies to Nessarose, but is too late. 
Dorothy has since taken the slippers and is walking to Oz with her dog Toto. 
The palace guards capture Elphaba, but Fiyero intervenes, allowing Elphaba to escape before surrendering himself and taken away to a cornfield to be tortured unless he tells them where Elphaba is. 
At the castle, Elphaba tries to cast any spell she can to prevent Fiyero the pains of torture, 
transforming him into the Scarecrow from afar, but suspecting that she has failed, 
begins to accept her reputation as "wicked" ("No Good Deed").
Dorothy, Toto, the Scarecrow, 
Boq – now the Tin Man – and the 
Cowardly Lion, who is revealed to be the 
lion cub Elphaba set free, 
are sent to kill Elphaba and bring her broomstick to the Wizard ("March of the Witch Hunters"). 
Elphaba captures Dorothy, refusing to release her until she relinquishes Nessarose's ruby slippers
 – the only things left of her dead sister. 
Glinda travels to Elphaba's castle to warn her of the trouble and persuade her to let Dorothy go. 
Although Elphaba refuses, the two women forgive each other for all grievances, acknowledging they have both made mistakes. 
To help her in her future, Elphaba gives the 
Grimmerie to Glinda. 
The two friends embrace for the last time before saying goodbye forever, and acknowledge that they are who they are because they knew each other ("For Good"). 
Immediately afterward, Dorothy throws a bucket of water on Elphaba, who appears to melt away. 
Grief-stricken, Glinda sees that all that remains of her friend is her black hat and a vial of green elixir. 
Back at the Emerald City, Glinda reminds the Wizard that he has an identical bottle, and it is revealed that the
 Wizard is Elphaba's biological father, being the stranger with whom her mother had an affair. 
Madame Morrible surmises that Elphaba had special powers because she was a child of both Oz and the outside world. 
Glinda orders the Wizard to leave Oz and sends 
Madame Morrible to prison before returning to the opening scene of the show.
Meanwhile, Fiyero opens a trap door in 
Elphaba's castle, down which she had descended, only pretending to die. 
Elphaba and Fiyero leave Oz forever, 
while Glinda continues her bittersweet celebration with the citizens of Oz, 
individually appreciating their true friendship and acknowledging that they have changed for the better because they knew each other ("Finale").





