You may have various permissions on your operating system blocking your 3dconnexion device.
You may be blocked by the User Account Control, or by your Security Software, or by your firewall software.  
You may need to set exceptions to our 3dconnexion driver, '3dxsrv.exe'

The Windows UAC (User Account Control) can block the 3Dconnexion software.
One option is to turn off the UAC, however, this lowers the level of security and
should not be necessary. You may want to do this temporarily to determine
whether UAC is preventing the the software from running.  If moving the UAC
slider to the lowest setting allows the 3Dconnexion driver to run, you can use
the 'Run as Administrator' function for the 3Dconnexion executable - 3dxsrv.exe
- so that you can return the UAC slider to its usual setting. 

Right click on:
C:|Program Files|3Dconnexion|3Dconnexion 3DxSoftware|3DxWare|3dxsrv.exe
Selected 'properties' from the context menu.
Select the __ tab
Enable 'Run as Administrator'

To add 3dxsrv.exe permission to the Windows firewall :
1. Open the Control Panel (All Items View).
2. Click on the Windows Firewall icon.
3. Click on the Allow a program through Windows Firewall link in the left blue pane. 
4. Navigate to 
C:|Program Files|3Dconnexion|3Dconnexion3DxSoftware|3DxWare|3dxsrv.exe
(On a 64-bit PC the folder would be 3DxWare64 rather that 3DxWare.)

Other firewalls have similar settings to identify '3dxsrv.exe' as an allowed
program. You will need to find the settings in your security applications for
'exceptions' or 'exclusions'.  Software that has both anti-virus and firewall
components may need exceptions in both.  
If you are using BitDefender - Add the
'3dxserv.exe' process to the Exclusions in 
BitDefender -> Expert Mode ->Antivirus module -> Advanced Settings. 

If you are not able to start the driver manually after adding
permissions/exclusions, you will need to check whether there is other software
running that could be blocking the 3Dconnexion software.   Security software
listed as 'Real-Time protection' generally has a System Tray icon and a menu
item that will allow protection to be turned off/disabled. 

Software that scans USB ports can block the 3Dconnexion software.  It is best to
exclude the USB port used by your device from being scanned if possible rather
than creating a software exception.

On a personal PC, you can disconnect from the internet/network and temporarily
turn off the security software to verify the source of the problem.  
On a network PC, an IT tech is typically needed to have access to the security
software.

For use with SolidWorks, the 3Dconnexion software requires using 'Run as
administrator'.  You can run the installation with the elevated privileges by
right-clicking on the 3DxSoftware downloaded to your PC then choosing  'Run as
administrator'.

Sincerely,
Bryan g.

-------------

I am no longer with 3Dconnection:
Now I am with Magento Go.

-----------------------------------
